The more developed somebody becomes and
when they become when they get to elite
levels of strength, the lines of
progress between strength and muscular
size are almost exactly the same. So
eventually size and strength are the
same thing, but that's not how it starts
out.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jquish. I'm a doctor
of biomedical engineering which gives me
a very unique perspective on all things
sports science
some medical type things nutrition
peptides hormones all that stuff the
things that you can affect about your
life and use to dramatically improve
your life if applied correctly. So today
I want to talk about how many sets of
resistance exercise you need. Now, the
reason I want to talk about this is
there's a lot of confusion and there's
studies coming out all the time that
seem like the story changes. Now, that's
not the way science works. The story
doesn't necessarily change. It's just
new studies come out and sometimes new
studies are like a metaanalysis where
they look at a whole library of
literature and try and determine what
that group of studies came up with or if
they can use statistics to sort of merge
these findings all together to get a
more definitive answer with more a
greater sample size and more knowledge
as opposed to less. the talking points
around volume. A lot of exercise volume
discussion comes from the bodybuilding
community and that's definitely been the
way the majority of bodybuilders have
approached their if you want to call it
a sport. Unfortunately,
that's really not how any other athlete
on earth trains. Let me explain the
differences where where we have
bodybuilders like they're doing
typically as many sets as they can
possibly squeeze into their schedule for
whatever body parts they're training
which is usually all of them. Like there
was a paper recently that said 50 plus
sets for quadriceps is uh still
indicated for positive growth trends.
Now, the way that works is if you look
at the curve of where you're getting
your gains, it kind of comes up and
flattens out. So, you know, by the time
you're at 50 sets, the line is almost
flat. So, you know, let's say on this
axis, you're looking how many sets there
are. There's a point where you get to
what would be called diminishing
returns. So, you're doing more sets, but
there's very incremental potential
progress that you're making. Also, to
throw you yet another curveball, muscle
growth tends to be different as it goes
with volume. Now, there's another caveat
to that, which I'll get back to. So
volume tends to have more an effect on
muscle size as opposed to just going for
strength.
However, this is one of the problems
that we have when looking at studies
with beginners. So when you look at
beginners,
there's not a lot of correlation between
muscular size and muscular strength. The
more developed somebody becomes and when
they become when they get to elite
levels of strength, the lines of
progress between strength and muscular
size are almost exactly the same. So
eventually size and strength are the
same thing. But that's not how it starts
out. Beginners will respond better to
higher exercise volumes. This is
something I did not know earlier on. And
but however,
you still get the greatest effect from
the first set. That's where you get the
most growth. The second set, still a
significant amount, much less than the
first. And then like when it comes to
strength training, you get very little
out of the third. Whereas when it comes
to muscular size, you get a some out of
the third and then some out of the
fourth.
Generally per on a per workout basis we
see between 9 and 12 sets per muscle
group to be the most advantageous for
building muscle size. Now remember
that's for beginners
and then still two sets optimized for
strength. Now for strength you also want
to train to momentary muscular failure.
You want to train to the point where the
muscle shuts down. for muscular size.
That has not been the trend. And some
studies have people using
momentary muscular failure as their
stopping point. But what is much more
common in bodybuilding is what's called
voluitional failure, which means you
just decide when you're worn out and
then you put the weight down, which is
really not momentary muscular failure at
all. And the less experience somebody
has, the worse at judging where their
potential muscular failure is. So you
run the risk of having a really lousy
set because the likelihood, especially
if you're starting, the likelihood of
you putting the weight down well before
you've taken the muscle to enough
exhaustion to really count as a good
set, you don't really know. This is one
of the benefits of variable resistance
because you can train with variable
resistance. So if I'm doing a full range
movement and then all of a sudden I
can't get to the top anymore because the
further away the higher the weight. So
let's say I'm doing 400 lb at the top. I
can't get there. Now I'm doing 350.
Okay? I can't get to 350 after three
more reps. So now I'm doing 300 and now
I'm doing 250. So you you diminish the
range based on what your maximum
capacity is. So with variable
resistance, you get the benefit of going
to more material muscular failure, you
could truly go to it and then you can
continue with lengthened partials. So
partials where the the target muscle is
more lengthened. That's why they call it
that. And then you can continue to do
more repetitions and compound that
fatigue. So, I know what you're
thinking. Well, Dr. Jay, what does that
mean in counting sets? Cuz that just
seems like a total curveball.
Fortunately, we've got a study for this.
Dr. Sean Connley put together with his
his group uh Team Rehab out of can't
remember the name of the city in
Michigan. Well, he has a couple
locations in Michigan. So these uh team
rehab in Michigan put together this
study that compared regular weight
training. They had a cohort of regular
weight training which did the ACSM's
programming for hypertrophy. So the
American College of Sports Medicine has
sort of a set of what you would do for
your workout for higher volume and
focusing on muscle hypertrophy. So we
wanted people to do that. And then we
had another group just doing one set per
workout per muscle group. The body split
between push and pull. This is like the
standard X3 program. So, so what we
learned with X3 and or just variable
resistance and diminishing range is one
set of that seems to equate to three
sets of regular weightlifting provided
you go to absolute momentary muscular
fatigue in all sets. you can basically
exercise only about 30% of the time that
you would normally exercise with free
weights with variable resistance. So,
massive time savings, but also
there's there's another sort of uh it's
not a curveball, but just an important
issue. You get to do more sets with a
fresh muscle and those sets are more
taxing. You're winning on both ends and
you're saving a ton of time. When it
comes to
variable resistance or and of course the
ultimate with variable resistance is the
Westside barbell X3 Academy when we have
Westside Barbell running this
programming. So it'll be the same
workout 4 days a week. So, you end up
doing sets of the same exercise four
days a week. And you think, well,
wouldn't I want to wait longer to wait
for the muscles to recover? Turns out
that higher exercise frequency, meaning
the more often you do an exercise is
actually better than doing a whole lot
of sets in one exercise experience and
then like shifting to another muscle
group and then doing a whole lot of sets
for that. So, like for example, you
could do a full body workout every day
and you'll get a lot more out of that
than if you divide the body up. And and
this is how like athletes train. And of
course, Westside Barbell works with the
NFL and a lot of professional sports.
So, they've got that all figured out.
And of course there is some crossover
because Westside Barbell has the
background in in powerlifting and a lot
of guys who are interested in
powerlifting are also interested in
bodybuilding and it's these funny
conversations all the time like well you
know what's the split and it's like
there is no split just you do all the
movements. Now, uh, the Westside barbell
also applies what's called the conjugate
method, which certain times of the year
you're going to do certain things and
then you're going to shift towards other
things. So, uh, like you know, you'll do
dynamic jumping for one month and then
you're going to shift to something else,
but you're always looking to improve
different aspects with the Westside
Barbar program. So, so sometimes it's
getting the body to be able to recruit
more musculature. So, you just focus on
that for a month and then you go back
into a more strength type set of
exercises for that group that you've
been potentiating the previous month.
So, you're always improving something,
but going back to the idea that it's
more important to hit the muscle
multiple days as opposed to just having
one day where you're going in on one
muscle and just doing a ton of sets
because the the term that's used in the
industry is junk volume. So, exercise
volume is not really doing anything for
you. Like, you're just beating up on the
muscle and probably just prolonging your
recovery and not actually stimulating
anything. So, you want to avoid that
when you're using variable resistance.
Remember, especially with the
diminishing range, one set really counts
like three sets. That's that's the way
that equates. And there's a a couple
ways that we can demonstrate that. But,
uh, Dr. Connley's study was phenomenal.
Uh, and that's how we know what we can
get with variable resistance. We can cut
down on the volume, increase the
intensity, get a better result with less
exhaustion, leaving more in the tank for
all the other things you have to do that
aren't aimed at building muscle.
I hope this helped. If this video helped
you, I want you to subscribe and follow.
I'm going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.